[SYCL][Doc] Cluster Group Extension Document (#13594)
intel/llvm: sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_work_group_cluster.asciidoc

= sycl_ext_oneapi_cluster_group

:source-highlighter: coderay
:coderay-linenums-mode: table

// This section needs to be after the document title.
:doctype: book
:toc2:
:toc: left
:encoding: utf-8
:lang: en
:dpcpp: pass:[DPC++]

// Set the default source code type in this document to C++,
// for syntax highlighting purposes.  This is needed because
// docbook uses c++ and html5 uses cpp.
:language: {basebackend@docbook:c++:cpp}

== Notice

[%hardbreaks]
Copyright (C) 2024-2025 Intel Corporation.  All rights reserved.

Khronos(R) is a registered trademark and SYCL(TM) and SPIR(TM) are trademarks
of The Khronos Group Inc.  OpenCL(TM) is a trademark of Apple Inc. used by
permission by Khronos.

== Contact

To report problems with this extension, please open a new issue at:

https://github.com/intel/llvm/issues

== Dependencies

This extension is written against the SYCL 2020 revision 8 specification.  All
references below to the "core SYCL specification" or to section numbers in the
SYCL specification refer to that revision.

> 

Reviewer: I think we should list the dependencies on other extension here, so if we're dependent on the enqueue functions extension and the compile-time properties extension, we can mention that here. @gmlueck is this the right place to put this, I'm not sure what the convention for that is?

== Status

> This is a proposed extension specification, intended to gather community

Reviewer 2: Is this a general SYCL extension you are proposing? or an NVIDIA backend specific one?

feedback.  Interfaces defined in this specification may not be implemented yet
or may be in a preliminary state.  The specification itself may also change in
incompatible ways before it is finalized.  *Shipping software products should
not rely on APIs defined in this specification.*

== Overview

> Nvidia's compute capability (cc) 9.0 devices introduced a new level in the thread hierarchy, called as thread block clusters, in CUDA terminology. A thread block cluster, is a collection of thread blocks (a workgroup in SYCL terminology), which are guaranteed to be scheduled to be scheduled on a separate compute unit, and are guaranteed to run in parallel, and the thread blocks in the cluster can access each other's shared memory (local memory SYCL terminology). This has various applications, convolutions, GEMMs and FFTs to name a few.

Reviewer 2: Add copyright notices to all mentions of NVIDIA and a general disclaimer at the right section

Author: Done

> Nvidia's compute capability (cc) 9.0 devices introduced a new level in the thread hierarchy, called as thread block clusters, in CUDA terminology. A thread block cluster, is a collection of thread blocks (a workgroup in SYCL terminology), which are guaranteed to be scheduled to be scheduled on a separate compute unit, and are guaranteed to run in parallel, and the thread blocks in the cluster can access each other's shared memory (local memory SYCL terminology). This has various applications, convolutions, GEMMs and FFTs to name a few.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Nvidia's compute capability (cc) 9.0 devices introduced a new level in the thread hierarchy, called as thread block clusters, in CUDA terminology. A thread block cluster, is a collection of thread blocks (a workgroup in SYCL terminology), which are guaranteed to be scheduled on a distinct compute unit, and are guaranteed to run in parallel, and the thread blocks in the cluster can access each other's shared memory (local memory SYCL terminology). This has various applications, convolutions, GEMMs and FFTs to name a few.
```

Reviewer 2: Could you add a link to the NVIDIA documentation of the feature?

> Nvidia's compute capability (cc) 9.0 devices introduced a new level in the thread hierarchy, called as thread block clusters, in CUDA terminology. A thread block cluster, is a collection of thread blocks (a workgroup in SYCL terminology), which are guaranteed to be scheduled to be scheduled on a separate compute unit, and are guaranteed to run in parallel, and the thread blocks in the cluster can access each other's shared memory (local memory SYCL terminology). This has various applications, convolutions, GEMMs and FFTs to name a few.

Reviewer: We typically keep to an 80 character line limit to make it easier for cmd line editors and limiting the scope of future changes.

Reviewer: No worries, thanks :)

> Nvidia's compute capability (cc) 9.0 devices introduced a new level in the thread hierarchy, called as thread block clusters, in CUDA terminology. A thread block cluster, is a collection of thread blocks (a workgroup in SYCL terminology), which are guaranteed to be scheduled to be scheduled on a separate compute unit, and are guaranteed to run in parallel, and the thread blocks in the cluster can access each other's shared memory (local memory SYCL terminology). This has various applications, convolutions, GEMMs and FFTs to name a few.

Reviewer: So I think the description in the CUDA describes this behaviours, it doesn't use the term run concurrently, rather it says co-scheduled on the SM, but I think that should be equivalent - https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#thread-block-clusters.

We may also want to specify in this extension the forward progress guarantee properties of work-groups within a cluster group when launching a kernel with a cluster group range, based on the definitions introduced in https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/proposed/sycl_ext_oneapi_forward_progress.asciidoc), though we'd need to confirm the forward progress guarantees of CUDA. Maybe this could be left as a known issue at the bottom of the extension for now.

> Nvidia's compute capability (cc) 9.0 devices introduced a new level in the thread hierarchy, called as thread block clusters, in CUDA terminology. A thread block cluster, is a collection of thread blocks (a workgroup in SYCL terminology), which are guaranteed to be scheduled to be scheduled on a separate compute unit, and are guaranteed to run in parallel, and the thread blocks in the cluster can access each other's shared memory (local memory SYCL terminology). This has various applications, convolutions, GEMMs and FFTs to name a few.

Author: >  but I think that should be equivalent - https://docs.nvidia.com/cuda/cuda-c-programming-guide/index.html#thread-block-clusters.

Yeah, it mentions that they are guaranteed to be co-scheduled  on the same GPC ( GPU Processing cluster).

> We may also want to specify in this extension the forward progress guarantee properties of work-groups within a cluster group

Thanks for raising this point. I did not cross my mind and this spec should definitely mention the forward progress guarantees, but I would like to look into it a bit further, and make an addendum later on. For now, as you suggested, I will be adding a known issue stating that forward progress guarantees are yet to be confirmed.

This proposal introduces a SYCL equivalent of the same, to be known as `cluster_group`, and adds the methods to launch a kernel with the cluster size mentioned, accessing the id's of the workgroup in the cluster, and to access another workgroup's local memory within the `cluster_group`.

== Specification
=== Feature test macro

This extension provides a feature-test macro as described in the core SYCL
specification.  An implementation supporting this extension must predefine the
macro `SYCL_EXT_ONEAPI_CLUSTER_GROUP` to one of the values defined in the table
below.  Applications can test for the existence of this macro to determine if
the implementation supports this feature, or applications can test the macro's
value to determine which of the extension's features the implementation
supports.

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===
|Value
|Description

|1
|The APIs of this experimental extension are not versioned, so the
 feature-test macro always has this value.
|===

=== Launching a kernel with work group clusters

> To launch a kernel with a cluster dimension, because of the special scheduling guarantees, the driver requires which kernel will be using the said feature. This introduces an additional parallel_for overload and parallel_for_work_group overloads, accepting cluster dimensions as a `sycl::range`, the dimension of which will be the same as that of the global and the local range.

Reviewer 2: I don't think we should not introduce this for parallel for work group

> To launch a kernel with a cluster dimension, because of the special scheduling guarantees, the driver requires which kernel will be using the said feature. This introduces an additional parallel_for overload and parallel_for_work_group overloads, accepting cluster dimensions as a `sycl::range`, the dimension of which will be the same as that of the global and the local range.

Reviewer: I think it would also make sense to have an aspect for querying whether a device supports the cluster-group launch, though since this is an Nvidia-specific extension, this may not be strictly necessary atm. @gmlueck what are you thoughts on this?

> To launch a kernel with a cluster dimension, because of the special scheduling guarantees, the driver requires which kernel will be using the said feature. This introduces an additional parallel_for overload and parallel_for_work_group overloads, accepting cluster dimensions as a `sycl::range`, the dimension of which will be the same as that of the global and the local range.

Reviewer: > Using enqueue functions and properties now,
Though if @AerialMantis or maybe @gmlueck , if you could please once verify if simply defining a subscript operator would be okay to return the property values / or it's usage in general, it would be really helpful.

I think having a subscript operator on the property would be useful, and I think there is precident for this in other extensions, see the `work_group_size` property in [sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties](https://github.com/intel/llvm/blob/sycl/sycl/doc/extensions/experimental/sycl_ext_oneapi_kernel_properties.asciidoc).

> I was planning on using sycl_ext_oneapi_device_architecture to check for CC 9.0, but just wanted to ask for other's opinion before committing to it. For now, I have not mentioned the behaviour of the backend in case this is used on unsupported devices, and can be implementation specific

I think it makes sense to check the compute capability as a way for the backend to verify that it can support a cluster group launch, though despite this being a CUDA-specific extension, I would reflect this as an aspect, and leave the architecture check as an implementation detail.

> On a similar topic, should we also extend get_info on what are the valid ranges for the cluster dimension ?

I think this is a good idea, it would be useful for users to be able to query what the maximum cluster group size can be, something like `info::device::max_cluster_group_size`. I wonder if it's possible for the maximum cluster group size to change based on the compilation of the kernel, in which case we may want to have a compiled kernel query as well, something like `info::kernel_device_specific::max_cluster_group_size`. In CUDA `cudaOccupancyMaxPotentialClusterSize` takes the kernel function as a parameter so that would suggest that this may be the case.

> To launch a kernel with a cluster dimension, because of the special scheduling guarantees, the driver requires which kernel will be using the said feature. This introduces an additional parallel_for overload and parallel_for_work_group overloads, accepting cluster dimensions as a `sycl::range`, the dimension of which will be the same as that of the global and the local range.

Author: Added the device query `ext_cuda_experimental_max_cluster_group_size`
following the naming convention for additional device queries.

[source,c++]
----
template<typename KernelName, int Dimensions, typename... Rest>
void parallel_for(nd_range<Dimensions> executionRange, range<Dimensions> clusterGroupRange, Rest&&... rest);

template<int Dimensions>
void parallel_for(nd_range<Dimensions> executionRange, range<Dimensions> clusterGroupRange, const kernel&  
kernelObject);
----

with the defition of `clusterGroupRange` being as follows - 

[%header,cols="1,5"]
|===

|`clusterGroupRange`
|`sycl::range` defining the number of workgroups which form a cluster in each dimension
|===

[NOTE]
====
The total number of workgroups must be a multiple of the cluster range in each dimension.
====

If non-zero cluster dimensions are specified when launching a kernel on non-supported hardware, it should result in a runtime-error.

=== Accessing the Work Group Cluster from within the kernel

> Building upon the group heirarchy in SYCL, this proposal another heirachy in the group after `sub_group` and `group` (for workgroups), a class to be called as `cluster_group`, which will  be accessible via the `nd_item` class, via a method to be introduced called `get_cluster_group()`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Building upon the group hierarchy in SYCL, this proposal another hierarchy in the group after `sub_group` and `group` (for workgroups), a class to be called as `cluster_group`, which will  be accessible via the `nd_item` class, via a method to be introduced called `get_cluster_group()`
```

run ispell  on the text :-)

[%header,cols="10,5"]
|===

|`cluster_group<Dimensions> nd_item::get_cluster_group()`
|Returns the consituent `cluster_group` in the kernel, representing this `cluster_group`'s overall position in the `nd_range`
|===

The `cluster_group` class to have the following methods, to access the various id's 

[%header,cols="5,5"]
|===
|Method
|Description

|`size_t get_group_linear_id(void)`
|Returns the flattened id of the calling `group` within the cluster

|`size_t get_local_linear_id(void)`
|Returns the flattened index of the calling `workitem` within the cluster

|`size_t get_group_linear_range(void)`

> |Returns the toal number of `groups` within the cluster

Author: changed it back it get_group_range()

|`size_t get_group_id(size_t)`
|Returns the id of the calling workgroup along the specified dimension

|`size_t get_group_linear_range(size_t)`
|Returns the toal number of `groups` within the cluster in the specified dimension

|`size_t get_local_linear_range(void)`
|Returns the total number of `workItems` within the cluster

> |===

Reviewer 2: all the above methods should be const right?

> To obain the total number of clusters within the group, and getting the cluster id, `nd_item` to have 2 more class methods, namely `get_cluster_range` and `get_cluster_id`

Reviewer: This sounds good, though I would say `nd-range` rather than `kernel`.

> To obain the total number of clusters within the group, and getting the cluster id, `nd_item` to have 2 more class methods, namely `get_cluster_range` and `get_cluster_id`

Author: changed nd_range to kernel

[%header,cols="10,5"]
|===

|`size_t nd_item::get_cluster_range(size_t)`
|Returns the total number of `cluster_group`s in the kernel across the specified dimension

|`size_t nd_item::get_cluster_id(size_t)`
|Returns the id of the cluster across the specified dimension
|===

> CC 9.0 devices feature the ability to synchronize all the workgroups within the cluster, and to achieve that in SYCL, this proposes add an overload to the existing `sycl::group_barrier` function, accepting `cluster_group` type.

Reviewer 2: Explain CC acronym somewhere

Author: Done, added a glossary section

[%header,cols="10,5"]
|===

|`void sycl::group_barrier(cluster_group<Dimensions> G)`
|Synchronizes all workgroup within the cluster
|===

To prevent un-defined behaviour, in the case where these range's or id's are queried without the cluster dimensions mentioned at launch can be considered as a cluster launch with cluster dimension as 1.

> === Accessing another workgroup's local memory

Reviewer 2: I suggest we move this to another extension. That way we can get them approved/implemented independently.

> Workgroup's within the cluster have the ability to access another workgroup's local memory. The local memory addresses can only be addressed by the `workItems` of that workgroup. Therefore, to access another workgroup's local memory, the address would need to be mapped such that it is addressable by calling `workItem` belonging to another workgroup. A public member function of the `cluster_group` class, `get_cluster_local_pointer` will perform the above and return the pointer which can then be dereferenced by the calling `workItem`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Work-group's within the cluster have the ability to access another work-group's local memory. Typically addresses which reside in the local memory of a work-group can only be addressed by the work-items of that work-group. Therefore, to access another work-group's local memory, the address needs to be mapped such the address in another work-group is addressable within the calling work-item. A member function of the `cluster_group` class; `get_cluster_local_pointer` will perform the above and return a pointer which can then be dereferenced by the calling work-item.
```

Reviewer: I think we have this now in `map_cluster_local_pointer`, I'll re-review the latest revision.

[%header,cols="10,5"]
|===

> |`T*  get_cluster_local_pointer(T* addr, size_t group_id)`

Reviewer: I would maybe suggest naming this something like `map_cluster_local_pointer` instead since it's doing more than just getting a pointer.

Reviewer: I think it would make sense for this interface to use `multi_ptr` to constrain it to pointers to local memory, and avoid UB. @Naghasan what do think think?

Reviewer: What are the control-flow semantics of the equivalant feature in CUDA, does this need to be called in convergent control flow, and must all work-items in the work-group take the same parameters?

Also is this function synchronous, when it returns is the pointer returned immediately accessible in the current work-group?

Reviewer: > Each thread can call this independently. The only requirement is that the thread block of which the shared memory is being accessed, should have started executing and not finished execution, which can be guaranteed by a cluster wide synchronization. (source Cuda programming guide)

So typically group-based functions in SYCL are convergent, in that all work-items in a particular scope must call the function in the same control flow, however, I believe in order to use this feature effectively it must be called per-work-item, and will only work on hardware with independent forward progress of work-items.

In the future if we come to generalise this extension across all backends I think we will need to address this, but since this is CUDA-specific I think it is fine for now. Though we should explain these semantics in definition of the function.

> The scope is per-thread, so when this pointer is returned it is accessible to that thread only

We should explain this in the definition of the function as well so it's clear that the mapping is blocking and will be complete by the time the function returns.

Author: > So typically group-based functions in SYCL are convergent, in that all work-items in a particular scope must call the function in the same control flow

But isn't that only for group algorithms which collaboratively compute / share data. I believe in this case there is no "collaboration" so to speak.

The only requirement to access another work-group's local memory, is that the work-group should exist, implying that local memory exists. Then Any work-item can map that local memory start address and start dereferencing it as required. 

> and will only work on hardware with independent forward progress of work-items.

Assume a device with the lowest level of independent forward progress at a sub-group level. On that device, even if only say 1 work-item calls this function, would this be conceptually different than - 
```cpp
if (sub_group.get_local_linear_id() == 0) {
    any_function_foo();
}
```
I say so because note, the work-item calling `map_cluster_local_pointer` does not **directly** depend on another work-item directly within it's group, as in any another work-item is not responsible to return the address, but rather the existence of another work-group within the cluster-group.

Author: > I say so because , the work-item calling map_cluster_local_pointer does not directly depend on another work-item within the group, as in any another work-item is not responsible to return the address, but rather the existence of another work-group within the cluster-group.

BTW, this is indeed very Nvidia specific, but it's a cuda only extension so it's fine for now. If another hardware starts to support this feature, and has another set of requirement, they would need to be incorporated somehow, depending on what they are.

But, one of my main discussions above is that maybe independent forward progress of work-items is not required for this feature from what I gather, seeing how it is exposed at the PTX level

Reviewer: >But isn't that only for group algorithms which collaboratively compute / share data. I believe in this case there is no "collaboration" so to speak.

That's right, this function I think we need to make. a clear distinction distinction between this kind of function and group functions/algorithms, even though these involve a group id.

> I say so because , the work-item calling this function does not directly depend on another work-item within the group, as in any another work-item is not responsible to return the address, but rather the existence of another work-group within the cluster-group.

So this is right, `map_cluster_local_pointer` can execute independently within the work-item with no dependency on other work-items in the group, however, depending on how the function lowers to instructions and whether the hardware supports independent forward progress of work-items, it may or may not be able to execute in separate work-items with different parameters concurrently.

But I think we can define it as a built-in function which executes within a work-item, which does not require convergence, permitting different parameters in each work-item, but leave it unspecified whether these are then executed concurrently or masked and executed in sequence. Though this is perhaps thinking too far in the future, as this is still a CUDA-specific extension.

> |Accepts the equivalent address to the memory location relative to the calling `workItem` which is to be mapped from the local memory of the workgroup, as specified by the `group_id`, denoting the flattened `group_id` within the cluster

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|Accepts the equivalent address to the memory location relative to the calling work-item which is to be mapped from the local memory of the work-group, as specified by the `group_id`, denoting the flattened `group_id` within the cluster.
```

Reviewer: Does this need to be linearized id, could this not just be the regular 'id'?
